
CHAPTER 7 – USE OF THE INTERNET					7-1

0700  BACKGROUND, AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES		7-1
        1.  Background							7-1
        2.  Authority								7-1
        3.  Guidance								7-2
        4.  Roles and Responsibilities				7-2

0701  DEFINITIONS								7-5

0702  PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE WORLD WIDE WEB SITES		7-8
        1.  Authority								7-8
        2.  Administration of Web sites				7-9
        3.  Content								7-15
        4.  Surveys								7-17
        5.  Public Inquiries Via E-mail				7-18
        6.  Interactivity							7-18
     
0703  INTERNET-BASED CAPABILITIES 					7-18
        1.  Background							7-18
        2.  Guidance								7-19
        3.  EOP									7-19
        4.  Official Posts to Web Logs and Social
            Media Sites							7-21
        5.  Personal Posts to Web Logs and Social
            Media Sites							7-22


7:  USE OF THE INTERNET 

0700  BACKGROUND, AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES

1.  Background 

    a.  The World Wide Web (also “Web” and “WWW”) is an extremely powerful public information, research, and collaboration tool.  Its use, within these guidelines, is encouraged.  This instruction assigns responsibilities and prescribes policies to ensure appropriate use of the Web to provide public information to global audiences, to allow access for research, and to permit collaboration.

    b.  The management, including oversight, of all content on official DON publicly accessible Web presences is a PA function. 

    c.  While its inherent global accessibility makes the Web a powerful public information tool and enhances productivity in the conduct of daily business, it also presents a potential risk to DON personnel, assets, and operations if inappropriate information is published.  Threats to the security of Navy and Marine Corps operations and the safety of DON personnel and their families can come in the form of attacks on computer systems, terrorist attacks on units or personnel, and identity theft.  The need to provide public information to the Navy’s and Marine Corps’ various audiences and gain efficiencies by conducting certain business processes via the Internet must be balanced with the need to maintain personal safety, operational and information security, protect personally identifiable information and abide by privacy regulations. 

2.  Authority 

    a.  The Chief of Information (CHINFO) is SECNAV’s lead official for the development of policy pertaining to content available on command and activity publicly accessible Internet presences.  

    b.  The establishment of a command presence on the publicly accessible World Wide Web remains a command prerogative, consistent with other leadership responsibilities for public communication and in compliance with policies issued in this and related directives.[n1]
3.  Guidance.  Official DON guidance on publicly accessible Web presences is based on Federal law and DoD policy.  This chapter applies to all DON commands and activities and all DON World Wide Web sites, related technologies, and Internet-based capabilities (IbC) – collectively termed “Web presences” – designed, developed, procured, or managed by DON activities and or by their contractors.  The policy and guidance on the release of information as outlined in chapter 2 of this instruction pertain to all forms of communication.

    a.  Only material that is approved for public release may appear on a publicly accessible Web presence.

    b.  A command presence within an IbC, while an official presence, is considered to be a part of that social media site and not an independent presence.  

4.  Roles and Responsibilities 

    a.  The DON Chief Information Officer (DONCIO) is responsible for providing Department-wide information management (IM) and information technology (IT) policy and guidance.  DONCIO:

        (1) Provides IM and IT policy and guidance for the DON in respect to the Web presence environment.

        (2) Provides policy and guidance pertaining to the operational integrity and security of all DON Web sites and Uniform Resource Locator (URL).

        (3) Provides policy and guidance pertaining to the management of all content on DON access-restricted Web site environments.[n2]

    b.  The DON Deputy CIO (Navy) and DON Deputy CIO (Marine Corps) are responsible for establishing procedures to ensure operational integrity and security of the computers and networks supporting DON Web sites. 

    c.  CHINFO is responsible for the development and administration of DON PA policies and procedures.  The USMC DIRPA is responsible for implementation of DON PA policy and the development and administration of USMC PA policies and procedures.  Additionally, CHINFO and DIRPA each will: 

        (1) Administer and update the policy as set forth in this chapter in collaboration with DONCIO.

        (2) Administer and maintain the official U.S. Navy Web site at www.navy.mil or the official USMC Web site at www.marines.mil for the posting of appropriate U.S. Navy- or Marine Corps-level information.

        (3) Maintain overall cognizance for content of U.S. Navy Web presences or of USMC Web presences as it pertains to the appropriateness of publicly accessible material.  This responsibility includes cognizance regarding Privacy Act and Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).  

            (a) For Navy Privacy Act and FOIA issues, CHINFO will coordinate, as appropriate, with the Office of the General Counsel, the Office of the Judge Advocate General (Code 13, Administrative Law), and or CNO office responsible for Privacy Act and FOIA policy.  

            (b) For Marine Privacy Act and FOIA issues, DIRPA will coordinate, as appropriate, with the Counsel to the Commandant, the Staff Judge Advocate to Commandant Marine Corps, and or the Marine Corps FOIA office. 

    d.  DON commands and activities maintaining Web presences will implement a comprehensive administration program.  They shall:

        (1) Ensure all information residing on the command and activity publicly accessible Web presence is reviewed by the command and activity PA representative and is accurate, factual and is appropriate for viewing by a worldwide audience.  If no PAO is assigned, commands and activities must refer to those at the next appropriate level in their chain of command.  Information not cleared for public release by proper authority must either be immediately removed or placed on a restricted-access site.  Per Assistant Secretary of Defense Networks and Information Integration guidance, domain restriction alone is not a sufficient block for access. 

        (2) Develop a local process for the approval of information posted on command or activity publicly accessible Web presences.  At a minimum, this process shall include review by the command’s PAO, and or other designated personnel. 

        (3) Contracted personnel are not authorized to publish content to a command or activity publicly accessible Web presence unless a DON official with the authority for public release of information approves and controls the content.

        (4) Designate, in writing, the person(s) authorized to post content to a command or activity publicly accessible Web presence.  At a minimum, the designee(s) shall:

            (a) Have access to and be familiar with current applicable directives, all Navy messages (ALNAVs), Navy administrative messages (NAVADMINs), all Marine Corps messages (ALMARs), and Marine Corps administrative messages (MARADMINs) regulating content of DON publicly accessible Web presences and shall be conversant in the provisions of these directives.

            (b) Serve as principal point of contact on all matters pertaining to administration of the Web presence(s).

            (c) Oversee the command's Web presence(s), ensuring compliance with current directives.  

            (d) Register Web presences as directed below:

                1.  Register Navy Web sites with Navy Web site Registration System (NWRS) at http://www.public.navy.mil/fcc-c10f/niocnorfolk/pages/registeryoursite.aspx.  Persons responsible for each site will review and re-register the Web site under their cognizance on an annual basis or whenever there is a change in any of the registration data fields.  Registering with Navy Information Operations Command (NIOC) Norfolk does not meet the additional requirement for commands or activities to register their Web sites with the DON Application Database Management System (DADMS). 

                2.  Submit Navy external official presences (EOP) for review and approval to www.navy.mil/socialmedia. 

                3.  Register Marine Corps Web sites with the DoD site registration database.  The database can be accessed online at http://www.defense.gov/RegisteredSites/SubmitLink.aspx.  Persons responsible for each site will review and update the registration for the presence under their cognizance on an annual basis or whenever there is a change in any of the registration data fields.  

                4.  Submit Marine Corps EOP for review and approval to www.marines.mil/socialmedia. 

                5.  Submit Navy and Marine Corps NEPA sites for review and approval to URL TBD[nh3]

            (e) Provide training for activity or command personnel on the provisions of this instruction and all other applicable DoD and DON instructions.

0701  DEFINITIONS.  The following are accepted definitions used in this chapter.

1.  DON Access-restricted Web site.  “Access restricted” is defined as being isolated from the Web by means of a user identification and password scheme or by common access card (CAC).  Domain and or Internet Protocol (IP) restriction is not an acceptable method of access control (see definition of publicly-accessible Web site).  May be either internal-facing or external-facing. 

2.  Advertisement and Advertising.  For the purposes of this instruction, material or information, regardless of media, disseminated in exchange for any remuneration or intended to promote any service, facility, or product of non-U.S. Government entities.  (Adapted from section 399(b) of title 47, U.S.C.)

3.  DoD Web site.  Any Web site or Web service operated by or for DoD, funded with DoD appropriations, or operated by DoD employees as part of their official duties or by contracted employees as part of contracted services to the Department.  Examples include:  Web portals such as Army Knowledge Online (AKO)/Defense Knowledge Online (DKO); Web logs (blogs) such as DoDLive; Wikis such as milWiki; professional networking such as milBook; media sharing such as DefenseImagery; video and audio streaming such as The Pentagon Channel.  

4.  DON World Wide Web site.  Any Web site or Web service operated by or for DON, funded with DON appropriations, or operated by DON employees as part of their official duties or by contracted employees as part of contracted services to the Department.  

5.  External-facing Web site.  A Web site that is available via the Internet to users at any location.  “External-facing” is synonymous with public-facing, but not publicly accessible.  External-facing Web sites may be either access-controlled or publicly-accessible.  Respective examples of each are www.nko.navy.mil (Navy Knowledge Online (NKO)), which is external-facing but not publicly accessible, and www.navy.mil, which is both external facing and publicly accessible.

6.  EOP.  Official PA activities conducted on non-DoD sites on the Internet (e.g., Facebook, Twitter).  These presences function as extensions of, not in lieu of, official DON Web sites.

7.  IbC.  All publicly-accessible information capabilities and applications available across the Internet in locations not owned, operated or controlled by DoD or the Federal Government.  IbC include collaborative tools such as social networking sites (SNS), social media, user-generated content, social software, e-mail, instant messaging, and discussion forums (e.g., YouTube, Facebook, MySpace, Twitter, Google Apps).  By definition, IbCs do not include command or activity World Wide Web sites.

8.  Internet Media.  Files delivered or acquired using any Internet protocol and supporting technology (e.g., Web pages, data or text, e-mail, video, audio, graphics, instant messages, chat).  

9.  Internal-facing Web site.  Available only to users on the same local area network/wide area network (LAN/WAN) that hosts the Web site.  Includes access available during virtual private network (VPN) sessions.  Internal-facing Web sites are access-controlled by default of the network access requirement(s) and may or may not require additional access controls such as user identification and password, or CAC credentials.  Internal-facing Web sites often serve as interfaces to intranets.  An example would be any Web site on the SECRET Internet Protocol Router Network (SIPRNet).

10.  Non-public Information.  Information generally not available to the public, obtained in the course of one's official DoD duties or position, which has not been cleared and authorized for release to the public or would normally not be releasable under FOIA (section 552 of title 5, U.S.C.), if requested.  The term "non-public information" includes "inside information," "proprietary information," and "source selection information,” controlled unclassified information, and other categories of information that are legitimately to be withheld from the public.  [Subpart 2635.703 of title 5, CFR; DoD Directive 5400.07, Freedom of Information Act, of 2 January 2008; DoD 5400.7-R DoD Freedom of Information Act Program of 4 September 1998; DoD 5200.1-R, Information Security Program, of 14 January 1997; and sections 3.104-4 and 3.104-5 of Federal Acquisition Regulations provide detailed information.

11.  Official DoD Information.  All information that is in the custody and control of the DoD, relates to information in the custody and control of the Department, or was acquired by DoD employees as part of their official duties or because of their official status within the Department. 

12.  Personal Information.  Information about an individual that identifies, links, relates, or is unique to, or describes him or her (e.g., a social security number; age; military rank; civilian grade; marital status; race; salary; home or office phone numbers; other demographic, biometric, personnel, medical, and financial information, etc).  Such information also is known as personally identifiable information (e.g., information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s identity, such as his or her name; social security number; date and place of birth; mother’s maiden name; and biometric records, including any other personal information that is linked or linkable to a specified individual.  Name, rank and rate and duty station are releasable.

13.  Publicly-accessible Web site.  An external-facing Web site available without access controls and to an unlimited audience.  Additionally, Web sites with only IP or domain restrictions are considered to be publicly-accessible Web sites for purposes of DoD policy and regulatory compliance.  The ease by which these restrictions may be bypassed makes them an unacceptable method of access control.  Only information authorized for public release may appear on a publicly-accessible Web site.

14.  Terms of Service.  Terms used to describe agreements made between the DoD and a third party IbC provider.  

15.  Web Presences.  Defined as to include World Wide Web sites, Web logs (Blogs) and IbC such as, but not limited to, SNS, and video or audio distribution applications.

16.  Web site.  A set of interconnected pages, services, and associated Internet media generally located on the same server, available at a URL (i.e., a Web address that begins with the protocol indicator of http or https), and prepared and maintained as a collection of information by a person, group, or organization.  Normally, a Web site is differentiated from a Web page in that a Web site is designated by the name to the left of a slant.  A Web page is to the right.  As example, http://www.site.navy.mil/admindept. 

17.  World Wide Web or Web.  The subset of the Internet capable of providing the public with user-friendly graphics-based multi-media access to information on the Internet.  It is the most popular means for storing and linking Internet-based information in all multi-media formats.  Navigation is accomplished through a set of linked documents that may reside on the same computer or on computers located almost anywhere else in the world.

0702  PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE WORLD WIDE WEB SITES

1.  Authority.  The establishment of a command or activity Web site on the publicly accessible World Wide Web remains a command prerogative, consistent with other leadership responsibilities for public communication.

    a.  All DON Web sites must have a clearly articulated purpose, approved by the commander, and supporting the command’s and or activity’s mission.

    b.  Only unclassified material that is approved for public release may appear on a publicly accessible Web presence.

    c.  Command and Activity Web sites.  All Web sites published by or under the aegis DON commands or activities are considered official and remain subject to this instruction. 

    d.  All Department of the Navy Web sites shall reside in a “navy.mil” or “marines.mil” domain except as follows:

        (1) Institutions of higher education, specifically the United States Naval Academy, the Naval War College, and the Naval Postgraduate School, and the Marine Corps Command and Staff College, may reside in an “.edu” domain.

        (2) Web sites for Navy Recruiting and Marine Corps Recruiting may reside on a “.com” domain.


		   (3) Web sites for Navy Morale Welfare and Recreation (MWR) and Marine Corps Community Service (MCCS) may reside on a “.com” domain in accordance with this instruction, DoD Instruction 1015.10 and DoD Instruction 8550.01.

        (4) Electronic commerce Web sites operated for the Navy Exchange Command, Morale Welfare and Recreation by Commander, Navy Installations Command, and Marine Corps Community Service (MCCS) may reside on a “.com” domain.
[nh4]

    e.  A designation of “Unofficial” is not recognized for any DON Web site.  Any Web site created by an employee of, member of, or person under contract to the DON, including those Web sites done under any contract or agreement, for any entity of the DON is subject to this instruction.

2.  Administration of Web Sites

    a.  The appearance, accuracy, currency, and relevance of the information presented by Navy and Marine Corps commands on the Web reflects on the DON's professional standards and credibility.  Additionally, information residing on a Web server associated with a ".mil" domain is interpreted by the worldwide public, including the American taxpayer and media, as reflecting official Navy or Marine Corps policies or positions.  Therefore, all information presented must be factual, accurate, current, and in compliance with DON public information policies.

    b.  All DON publicly accessible Web sites will provide accessibility to all U.S. citizens, including persons with disabilities.  [n5]

    c.  All command and activity home pages - the logical entry point of the command or activity Web site - must contain, at a minimum, the following:[n6]

        (1) Full organizational name and official postal mailing address.

        (2) A statement that the site is an official U.S. Navy or USMC Web site.

        (3) Links to: 

            (a) A tailored privacy policy on the home page.  All references to the privacy policy shall state:  “Please read our Privacy Policy notice.”  Overt warning signs or other graphics, such as the “skull and crossbones” or “cloak and dagger,” or wording indicating danger or warning, are specifically forbidden.  The format and content of the tailored privacy policy notice will be based on that contained in the DoD Memorandum Web Site Administration Policies and Procedures, 25 November 1998, (updated 11 January, 2002), part V, paragraph 4.  Web sites will not require the viewer to agree with any policy.

            (b) The Navy's official Web site, http://www.navy.mil, and or the Marine Corps' official Web site http://www.marines.mil.

            (c) The parent command, or immediate superior in command, home page where applicable.

            (d) The Navy and or Marine Corps recruiting sites at http://www.navy.com and http://www.marines.com, respectively.

            (e) The Navy or Marine Corps official FOIA Web sites as appropriate (http://foia.navy.mil/ or http://www.marines.mil/unit/hqmc/foia/Pages/default.aspx.

            (f) A hyperlink to http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/Veterans/Default.aspx accessed by clinking on the icon available at https://pa-net.navy.mil/eRoomReq/Files/chinfo/PANET/013b94c/Lifeline.JPG.

            (g) Commands are encouraged to link to the U.S. Navy’s “Frequently Asked Questions” page on the official U.S. Navy Web site at http://www.navy.mil.  Questions concerning the U.S. Navy or the USMC as a whole shall also be directed to http://www.navy.mil or http://www.marines.mil , as appropriate.

    d.  In addition to article 0702, paragraph 2c(3)(e) above, Navy echelon 2 and Marine Corps senior commands will incorporate into their Web site an electronic reading room to contain and serve documents most frequently requested through FOIA.

    e.  Web sites must not contain any written information or display any logo indicating the Web site is best viewed with any specific Web browser(s); or, that the Web site has been selected as a recommended or featured site by any organization; or, point to any particular search engines or recommend any commercial software.  Web sites developed and or maintained by contractors may not include the contractor’s name nor may they link to the contractor's Web site, either in the normal view of the page or in any source code.

    f.  Web sites will not provide commercial software or links to commercial software except in those cases where the software is unique and required for viewing documents provided within the Web site’s purpose.  In these cases, only a text link directly to the vendors’ download Web page is permitted.  The use of corporate logos is prohibited.

    g.  Command Web sites may display the logo of a social networking service only if linking directly to the command’s presence on that service and the command’s presence is registered with www.navy.mil/socialmedia for Navy commands or www.marines.mil/socialmedia for Marine Corps commands.

    h.  Web sites will not display any logos or graphics for events, issues, or commemorations unless that event, issue, or commemoration is command sponsored (i.e., a command event), or is approved by SECDEF or SECNAV.  Examples of approved events, issues, or commemorations that are national in scope include, but are not limited to, Navy or Marine Corps birthdays, POW/MIA Day, and Federal secular holidays.  

    i.  Web sites will not display any commercial page counters. 

    j.  Web sites shall not display personnel lists, "roster boards,” organizational charts, or command staff directories which show individuals’ names, individuals’ phone numbers or e-mail addresses which contain the individual’s name.  

        (1) However, general telephone numbers and non-personalized e-mail addresses for commonly-requested resources, services, and contacts, without individuals’ names, are acceptable.

        (2) The names, telephone numbers, and personalized, official e-mail addresses of command and activity PA personnel and or those designated by the commander as command spokespersons may be included in otherwise non-personalized directories, etc. 

        (3) If deemed by the commander as a best business practice, the Navy Personnel Command or the Marine Corps Manpower and Reserve Affairs may post names and official e-mail addresses of detailers and or monitors.  

        (4) Naval medical centers and naval hospitals may also post names, official portraits and official e-mail addresses of primary care managers, i.e., those who see patients, and patient affairs representatives.  Portraits should be restricted to head and shoulders.

        (5) Given that the academic environment has professional requirements for maintenance of academic standing, the professional academic staff of Navy institutions of higher education (the U.S. Naval Academy, the Naval Postgraduate School, the Naval War College, and the Marine Corps Command and Staff College), but not the support staff, may be identified by name, specialty, etc., as required to maintain academic standing.  Additionally, the faculty may interact with the public as part of the process of recruiting students, and thus some identifying information is appropriate.  However, such information may include only professional information and not information on their families, place of birth, hobbies, etc., or other information not related to their academic credentials.

            (a) Included official portraits will remain restricted to the institutions’ senior leadership, department heads and academic faculty.  Portraits must be head and shoulders only.

            (b) For support staff and other departments, contact information will only be generic, e.g., Admissions Office, phone XXX-XXX-XXXX, e-mail:  admissions@institution.edu and will contain no personal information.

        (6) Biographies and official portraits of flag officers, commanders, commanding officers, officers in command, executive officers or deputies, the civilian equivalents of those officers just listed, and command master chief petty officers and senior enlisted advisors or Marine Corps master gunnery sergeants or sergeants major may be posted to command and activity Web sites.  However, biographies published on publicly accessible Web sites will not include date of birth, age, current residential street address, nor any information about family members.  Place of birth, if desired to be included, will be presented as “… is a native of…” 

        (7) Due to the unique community relations nature of the missions of the U.S. Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron, the U.S. Navy and Marine Bands and their component units, and fleet bands, portraits and biographies of the command or unit members are permitted, providing such biographies are in compliance with other sections of this chapter.  In each case, official portraits should be just head and shoulders.

        (8) To avoid the appearance of official endorsement, Web sites will not link to non-government, commercial-entity sites except as follows:

            (a) The U.S. Navy and USMC official Web sites (http://www.navy.mil and http://www.marines.mil) may link to federally chartered, military-related organizations.  Commands desiring to link to military-related organizations’ Web sites will do so only by linking to the appropriate pages on the U.S. Navy or USMC official Web sites. 

            (b) Links to appropriate private sector non-commercial sites by the Bureau of Medicine, the Chief of Chaplains, or DON institutions of higher education, may be made for purposes of additional educational resources, provided those links support the command’s core mission and avoid the appearance of official endorsement.

           (c) Linking disclaimers will not be used when linking to the Web site of a local, State, or Federal Government entity.

           (d) As part of the command's family support function, Web sites installations may link to local chambers of commerce (or overseas equivalents) and local government agencies.  Tenant commands will link to the installation Web site to provide access to these external links.  

            (e) Links to weather services may only be made to the appropriate Navy meteorology and oceanography center or to the National Weather Service of the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration.

            (f) Navy ships may link to namesake organizations provided those organizations are of the alumni or museum type.  For example, the current U.S. Ship Harry S. Truman (CVN 75) site may link to a Harry S. Truman association or the Harry S. Truman Presidential Library Web site. 

            (g) Links will not be made to the home pages of Web sites of private sector news media, magazines, publishers, or radio or television stations.  However, direct links may be made to specific articles about the DON command or activity in traditional and online media when such linking would be reasonably seen as not an endorsement of the entity to which the link is made.

            (h) Echelon 2 acquisition commands may link to Web pages of partners in industry provided those Web pages pertain solely and directly to a command program and those links do not constitute nor appear to constitute an endorsement of that partner and or its products or services.  Links may not be made to the partner’s main corporate Web site.

            (i) Publicly accessible Web sites shall not provide links to content beyond the established access point to restricted sites, so as to not reveal the internal structure.

            (j) Links from a command Web site to the command’s presence on a social networking service are permitted and may be indicated through the use of social networking service logo icons.  However, the link must be clearly identified as a link to the command’s presence.

            (k) Links from a command Web site to a registered Navy or Marine Corps NEPA site are permitted.[nh7]

        (9) Web sites using frames will not link to any external content within the window of a frame nor will any Web site prohibit -- through the use of coding -- the visitor to return to a previously visited Web site (i.e., curtailing the use of the “back” button on the browser).

        (10) No materials or services may be advertised for sale or be sold via a command Web site.  This includes command memorabilia, ball caps, etc.

        (11) Morale, welfare, and recreation (MWR) and Marine Corps community services (MCCS) activities are an integral part of nearly every DON installation and therefore must have a presence on the installation’s Web site.  This presence shall only contain general information regarding the installation MWR and MCCS programs such as patron eligibility, services offered, location of offices, telephone numbers, and hours of operation.  Commercial sponsorship or advertisements shall not be displayed on publicly accessible MWR and MCCS Web presences.  Links to additional information regarding MWR-sponsored events hosted on non-“.mil” domains shall not be displayed on publically accessible MWR and MCCS Web presences, but may be included on pages accessibly only to authorized MWR and MCCS patrons.

        (12) Information that is under the purview of and posted to other military Web sites will not be duplicated but may be referenced or otherwise linked.

3.  Content  

    a.  Information Release Requirements.  All information, which includes graphics, photos, video and multimedia productions, posted on all publicly accessible DON Web sites must be carefully reviewed to ensure it meets the standards and requirements for the public release of information as published in chapter 2. 

    b.  Visual Information (VI) Procedures.  (See chapter 6, article 0601.)

    c.  Content Restrictions.  Specific Web site content restrictions include:

        (1) Classification of Material on Public Web Sites.  Web sites will not include classified material, “For Official Use Only” information, proprietary information, or information that could enable the recipient to infer this type of information.  This includes, but is not limited to, lessons learned or maps with specific locations of sensitive units, ship battle orders, threat condition profiles, etc., activities or information relating to ongoing criminal investigations into terrorist acts, force protection levels, specific force protection measures being taken or number of personnel involved, Plans of the Day, or Plans of the Month.  When it is necessary to gain release authority from a senior in the chain of command, subordinate commands will submit material for clearance only after it has been reviewed and necessary amendments made to the fullest capability of the submitting command. 

        (2) Identification of Family Members.  Web sites will not identify immediate family members of DON personnel by name, including in imagery captions, except for the spouses of senior leadership who are participating in public events such as ship naming, commissioning, etc.  Furthermore, family member information will not be included in any online biographies. 

        (3) Copyrighted and Trademarked Material.  Web sites shall not contain any material that is copyrighted or under trademark without the written permission of the copyright or trademark holder.  The material must relate directly to the command’s primary mission and must be clearly marked that the material is under copyright and by whom.  Works prepared by DON personnel as part of their official duties and posted to a command Web site may not be copyrighted, nor may a DON Web site itself be copyrighted.

        (4) Use of Maps.  Web sites will not display the locations of operational commands or force protection facilities on installation maps.  The location of medical, retail, personnel support, and recreation facilities are permitted.  The use or copying of commercial and or copyrighted maps is prohibited.

        (5) Identification.  Identification of individual Service members or civilian employees of the DON, shall be restricted to name, rank or rate, unit to which assigned (if appropriate for release), and hometown.  Other than in official news releases or stories, such identification shall only be made to indicate the single point of contact for a provided service, or when indicating an author of a document, report, or study.

    d.  Educational Mission.  In instances where the mission of the command includes an educational mission, and where unclassified dissertations or professional papers may be published to the Web for the purpose of peer review, the following disclaimer for exchange of professional information and ideas among scientists, physicians, or educators, must be displayed:

"Material contained herein is made available for the purpose of peer review and discussion and does not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of the Navy or the Department of Defense."

4.  Surveys 

    a.  The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA) requires that surveys requesting identical information from 10 or more members of the public, including family members of retirees and or DoD and DON contractors, must be approved by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).  Approval must be obtained for Web-based surveys using check boxes, radio buttons, drop-down menu selections, or any combination thereof.  

        (1) Commands requesting approval from OMB must submit an official letter via the appropriate chain of command to OMB and must include justification for the proposed survey.

        (2) Navy commands will submit requests via the Director of the Navy Staff, Director of Records (DNS-5). 

        (3) Surveys of Marine Corps military members, their families, and of Marine Corps civilian employees are administered under the authority of the Commandant.

    b.  Unstructured solicitations from the public that have an open-ended response (i.e., a text area) are not subject to the PRA and, therefore, do not require OMB approval.

    c.  An open-ended offer for visitors to a Web presence to provide comments via a feedback "mailto" to the Web manager does not require OMB approval.  However, a clear statement as to the use of this information and to how long it may be retained must be incorporated in the privacy and security notice with a link to that notice. 

    d.  Commands desiring to survey DON military members, their families or DON civilian employees must vet their plan with the Research, Modeling, and Analysis Division (OPNAV N14).

    e.  Internet-based surveys of DON military members, their families or DON civilian employees will not be accessible to the general public.  Surveys that are hosted on publicly accessible Internet sites, including DON Web sites and DON contracted Web sites, shall require filtration or protection.  This requirement can be met by password protection for access to the survey.  Alternatively, Web-based surveys may be conducted on Navy Intranet sites (e.g., NKO) that are access restricted.  This policy applies to all Navy Web surveys regardless of whether they require Navy survey approval or are exempt.

 5.  Public Inquiries Via E-mail   
 
    a.  DON commands and activities may allow visitors the ability to query the command via e-mail on their Web sites.  Commands and activities are cautioned that establishing and maintaining this interactivity can be extremely labor-intensive.  

    b.  Public queries for information should be linked or directed to the command or activity PA office.  Queries should be handled consistent with other written requests for information.  Responses shall discuss only those issues within the command’s cognizance and shall not violate the release of information policy.

6.  Interactivity.  DON commands may not operate unmoderated news groups, bulletin boards, or any other unrestricted access posting services on command Web sites.  This specifically prohibits a publicly accessible, interactive Web site that supports automatic posting of information submitted by personnel other than those authorized by the command to post information. (See also article 0703.)

0703  INTERNET-BASED CAPABILTIES

1.  Background.  IbCs are defined as publicly accessible information capabilities and applications available across the Internet in locations not owned, operated, or controlled by the DoD or the Federal Government.  IbC include collaborative tools such as SNS, social media, user-generated content, social software, Web-based e-mail, instant messaging, and discussion forums.  Examples of IbC include YouTube, Facebook, MySpace, Twitter, and Google applications. 

2.  Guidance  

    a.  Commands and activities shall designate administrators for official use of IbC.  The administrator is responsible for ensuring postings to the IbC comply with content policy.  Commands permitting postings by others must ensure the site contains an approved user agreement delineating the types of information unacceptable for posting to the site and must remove such unacceptable content.  At a minimum, the DON’s current social media user agreement is required.  This agreement can be found at the Navy Social Media Resources page, accessed at www.chinfo.navy.mil.

    b.  Commands and activities must develop written local procedures for the approval and release of all information posted on command and activity official use of IbC.

    c.  Commands and activities will use collaboration and information sharing tools within an access restricted .mil or .gov domain for all pre-decisional information, proprietary information, business sensitive information, information designated as for official use only (FOUO), or any other form of sensitive but unclassified (SBU) information.

    d.  Commands will actively monitor and evaluate official use of IbC for compliance with security requirements and for fraudulent or unacceptable use.

3.  EOP 

    a.  An EOP may not serve as the DON entity’s primary Web presence and must link to the primary Web presence; the command or activity’s official Web site.

    b.  Content may be posted only by those authorized by the commanding officer or designated representative(s) to release official information to the public.  This may include an individual posting under the supervision of those authorized to release official information.  Contracted personnel are not  authorized to publish content to a command or activity EOP unless a DON official with the authority for public release of information approves and controls the content. 

    c.  All content posted by a DON entity remains subject to this instruction and must comply with DON public information policies.  (See chapter 2.)

    d.  Administrators of EOP permitting postings by others (e.g., fans) must ensure the site contains an approved user agreement delineating the types of information that are unacceptable for posting to the site and must remove unacceptable content.  At a minimum, DON’s social media user agreement with a conspicuous link thereto is required.  This agreement can be found at the Navy Social Media Resources page which can be accessed at www.chinfo.navy.mil.  This page also provides additional information about official external presence policy, guidance, training, and recommended best practices.

    e.  Commands and activities shall not publish and shall prohibit content within the following categories:

        (1) Advertising, promotions, solicitations, or endorsements of products, non-government services, or of a political nature. 

        (2) Personal attacks, vulgar, hateful, violent, or racist language, slurs, stereotyping, hate speech, and other forms of discrimination based on any race, color, religion, national origin, disability, or sexual orientation.

        (3) Information that may engender threats to the security of Navy and Marine Corps operations or assets, or to the safety of DON personnel and their families

        (4) Classified information, pre-decisional information, proprietary information, business sensitive information, information designated as FOUO, or any other form of SBU information.

        (5) Information protected by the Privacy Act of 1974 or violates the privacy of the individual or HIPAA of 1996.

        (6) Information - other than authorized press releases - about casualties prior to official confirmation that next of kin have been notified and a competent authority authorizes publication of specific casualty information.  Commanders are reminded that casualty information is to be tightly controlled and heavily scrutinized.

        (7) Information - other than authorized press releases - regarding events or incidents currently under investigation.

        (8) Information that is under copyright or trademark, without permission of the holder.

        (9) Unit or other personnel lists and rosters, charts or directories, which provide the names, addresses and telephone numbers of unit members.

        (10) Material that is political in nature or that endorses or promotes products, opinions or causes other than those already officially endorsed by DON.

        (11) Links to commercial content which may imply endorsement.  These links include those to commercial entities, charities or causes.  Links to the CFC and or the Navy-Marine Corps Relief Society are permitted and encouraged.

    f.  Links that go directly to articles or posts about the DoD, the DON or any component thereof are permitted. 

4.  Official Posts to Web Logs and Social Media Sites.  DON commands and activities are authorized to post information to Web logs (blogs) or to social media services, beyond their EOP, provided:

    a.  The post is executed by an individual authorized to release public information about the command or activity;

    b.  The post is clearly identified as being made by an authorized member of the command;

    c.  The post is truthful, accurate, and written in a professional manner, including correct spelling and grammar; and

    d.  In cases necessitating a correction of a previous post by another contributor to the blog, such posting is done in a respectful, clear and concise manner.  Personal attacks are prohibited.

5.  Personal Posts to Web Logs and Social Media Sites 

    a.  Individual members of the DON are authorized to participate in or operate blogs or other social networking services.  The DON recognizes the value of these communication channels in posting current information and supporting the morale of personnel, their families and friends.  As long as personnel adhere to specific restrictions on content, the DON encourages the use of blogs and social networking services, and recognizes this free flow of information contributes to legitimate transparency of the DON to the American public whom the DON serves.  In any instance in which an individual member of the DON is identified as such, either directly or indirectly, on a blog or other social media service, that individual is considered as representing the DON and must act accordingly.

    b.  The following is a summary of some of the types of information that must not be displayed on personal IbC operated by individual members or on presences to which the individual may publish:

        (1) Classified information, pre-decisional information, proprietary information, business sensitive information, information designated as FOUO.

        (2) Information protected by the Privacy Act of 1974 or HIPAA of 1996.

        (3) Information - other than authorized press releases - about casualties prior to official confirmation that next of kin have been notified and some competent authority authorizes publication of specific casualty information.  Commanders are reminded that casualty information is to be tightly controlled and heavily scrutinized.

        (4) Information - other than authorized press releases - regarding events or incidents currently under investigation.

        (5) Information that is under copyright or trademark, without permission of the holder.

        (6) Unit or other personnel lists or rosters, charts or directories, or the names, addresses and telephone numbers of unit members.

        (7) Any image, still or motion, of any military operation or activity unless that image is personal and has been cleared by the proper authority if there is a potential for a security or privacy violation.

        (8) Language that may tend to diminish the confidence in or respect due to his or her superior officer(s), per the Uniform Code of Military Justice. 

References:

29 U.S.C. §794d 

44 U.S.C. §3501

OMB Memo M-05-04 of 17 December 2004

OMB Memo, "Social Media, Web-based Interactive Technologies, and the Paperwork Reduction Act," of 7 April 2010

OMB Memo M-10-22 of 25 June 2010

OMB Memo M-10-23 of 25 June 2010

OMB Circular A-130 (Management of Federal Information Resources)

For DoD Issuances, please see http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/index.html

DoD Policy Memorandum, “Web Site Administration,” 7 December 1998(http://www.defense.gov/webmasters/policy/dod_web_policy_12071998_with_amendments_and_corrections.aspx)

DoD Instruction 1015.10 of 6 July 2009

DoD Instruction 5040.02 of 27 October 2011

DoD Instruction 8410.01 of 14 April 2008

DoD Instruction 8550.01 of 11 September 2012

For all SECNAV and OPNAV instructions, please see the Department of the Navy Issuances Web site at http://doni.daps.dla.mil/

Department of the Navy Chief Information Officer/Chief of Information Joint Memorandum, “Department of the Navy Web Presence Policy – The Registration, Compliance of, and Investment in, All Unclassified Web Sites and Uniform Resource Locators (URL)  (http://www.doncio.navy.mil/PolicyView.aspx?ID=577)

SECNAVINST 5211.5E

SECNAVINST 5239.3B 

SECNAVINST 5430.7Q

SECNAVINST 5510.36A

SECNAVINST 5720.42F

OPNAVINST 5239.2

OPNAVINST 5300.8C 

NAVSUP P-487 (NOTAL) 
[n1]This is more  of a requirement now., not a prerogative.
[n2]Private portals
[nh3]Requires NEPA sites to be submitted to the EA/EIS site registry.
[nh4]Addresses request from CNIC and USMC to ensure parity with other services per DoDI 8550.01.
[n5]Both a content and a technology issue.
[n6]A content issue
[nh7]Allows Navy and Marine Corps sites to link to NEPA sites
8-22

